[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>WILLIAM HENRY: What if there
is a part of ourselves that
has a bird's eye
view of our lives
and can see into the future?
What if you never connected
with that part of yourself,
then what if you did?
How different would your life
be if you followed its guidance?
>>CLARE HENRY: Next on
"Arcanum," The Divine Spark.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>WILLIAM: Let's begin our
investigation into the divine
spark with some insight
into Gnosticism.
Gnosis means wisdom,
and Gnosticism is really
a collection of ancient ideas
about awakening or attaining
enlightened consciousness.
Most of what we know about
Gnosticism comes from Egypt.
In 1945, the Nag Hammadi
library was unexpectedly
discovered in Egypt, in
a cave in upper Egypt.
This remarkable collection
of 4th century Coptic texts,
or Egyptian Christian
texts, are thought
to have been copied from
material that may date back
to as early as the second
half of the 1st century.
And it casts new light upon
long obscured Christian history.
Gnostic views are
diverse; however, they
agreed on three things:
one, reincarnation,
the idea that the
soul will transmigrate
into new bodies from
lifetime to lifetime;
second, there exists a class
of evil powers called archons,
and part of our
quest is to learn
to evade the archons, both
in life and in the afterlife;
thirdly, they believed
in that resurrection
was possible for
every individual.
In fact, that is
our ultimate goal.
We wish to resurrect
from this realm.
Gnostic theology centered
two additional ideas:
that a divine spark
dwells within,
and that the process
of resurrection
represents a universal
principle-- this means
it happens not just on
earth, but in other realms--
and that Jesus demonstrated
for humanity the way
that people, ordinary people,
can ascend and resurrect
into other realms, into
the divine realm, in fact.
And in William Blake's
magnificent painting
of the resurrected
Jesus, we see his divine
spark illuminated from within,
transforming his entire body
into light.
"The Resurrection" from 1805
is one of Blake's masterpieces
among many.
Another is his painting "Michael
Foretells the Crucifixion,"
where Blake again emphasizes
that Jesus shows the way
to light the candle
within, if you will,
ignite the divine spark, and
transform the body into light.
In other words, to resurrect the
body from the material plane.
Gnostics believe that in
order to achieve salvation,
or resurrection,
one must possess
a certain knowledge,
or gnosis, which
must be delivered to a person
by a messenger of light.
Now this gives us all
hope, because we don't all
have to know exactly
everything about resurrection.
We just need to
know enough to come
on the radar of a messenger
of light, who will assist us
in our transformation.
This literature is
called apocalyptic.
And what that means is
it's revelatory literature
in which revelation,
or gnosis, is delivered
to a human recipient by an
otherworldly or supernatural
being.
This revelation discloses
a transcendent reality,
or a supernatural world.
So we're talking
about the Gnostics
recognizing that there
are these messenger
beings, celestial beings,
otherworldly supernatural
beings, who can enter
into our consciousness
and assist us in completing our
earthly mission of attaining
the resurrection body.
An example of this
literature is the "Apocalypse
of Abraham," which describes
a celestial being named Jaeol,
who some believe is actually
Yahweh, the Old Testament
God, an angel who lived
in the seventh heaven
and was sent to
Abraham to reveal
the history of his people
and was also sent to Daniel,
who lived in Babylon during
the Old Testament times.
So here is this
remarkable angel Jaeol,
who is shown with this
rainbow ring round his body.
This is based upon the
description in the "Apocalypse
of Abraham" that tells us that
the appearance of this being's
body was like sapphire,
the look of his countenance
like chrysolite, and the
hair of his head like snow,
with a turban upon his head like
the appearance of a rainbow.
This is yet another example
of a rainbow-like being,
where a celestial being
possessing a rainbow body that
manifests on the Earth plane
and delivers cosmic knowledge.
So here's the detail of Jaeol
with this shimmering or shining
face, this rainbow
ring around its head,
indicating that this is a
being of rainbow body light.
This being is delivering
sacred knowledge
to Abraham, who is
consuming that knowledge.
He's eating this book.
John the Revelator
also did the same thing
when an angel
manifested before him.
John ate the heavenly
book that contained
the Gnostic knowledge
of ascension.
This messenger is a helper
that descends from above
and is considered actually
our heavenly light twin.
Now think about that.
What they're suggesting is
that our earthly body is,
in a sense, a sort of a puppet
on a string of this more
magnificent, evolved aspect
of ourselves, our higher self.
And by linking with it,
we're able to download
this sacred knowledge that we
need to complete our ascension.
Every soul has a
messenger of light.
Every soul has a higher self.
And part of our
quest is to learn
to link with that
aspect of ourselves.
I believe it's what
brought you here today
to watch this program, to absorb
this knowledge at this time.
By being here, it says
you're ready to make
the link with this
aspect of yourself.
You're ready to get
the message, to receive
the download in other words.
"If you want to know your Higher
Self," said Rudolf Steiner,
"look at the people you've
met in the last year."
Who are you calling
into your life that
will help you to
complete your ascension?
Powerful, powerful
idea from Mr. Steiner.
I was once in Florida giving a
presentation on this subject,
and I asked the audience,
hey, have you ever
connected with your higher self?
And how do you know
when it's your higher
self that's speaking to you?
Your messenger self?
And a woman-- I'll never forget
her answer-- she said, whenever
I'm in a time of crisis
or perhaps afraid,
the voice always
asks, what would
you do if you weren't afraid?
Remember the message of the
transfiguration from Jesus.
Rise and do not be afraid.
It seems that that's our number
one mission on the Gnostic path
is to overcome fear,
to leave that behind,
and act is if, not that we're
fearless, but rather, that we
are fully empowered beings.
What would you do if
you weren't afraid?
What would you do if you
knew you would always
have the highest success?
What new decisions or
choices would you make?
What things would you
do that perhaps you've
procrastinated on?
Maybe part of the message
of this program for you
now is to-- to get on to
those things, to do it now,
and to act as if you
are fully empowered.
And then you will be.
Could be as simple as that.
"What you're looking for,"
said St. Francis of Assisi,
"is what is looking."
In other words,
that messenger self
is ever present in
our consciousness.
And while we're
seeking its guidance,
it's also what is
looking at us and trying
to communicate with us.
So what you are looking
for is what is looking,
another profound message.
This story is reflected
in a Slavonic tale
called "The Ladder of Jacob."
It's a variation on the book
of Genesis' story of Jacob, who
fell asleep and laid his head
on the Philosopher's Stone
and saw the ladder ascending
into the heavens with angels
ascending and descending
on either side.
In the Slavonic version,
Jacob sees an angel
named Sariel, who
instructs Jacob regarding
the sacred secrets of heaven.
He's communicating with his
messenger self, in other words.
And what happens in the
stories, at the conclusion
of this instruction, Jacob
is given the knowledge
that he has a heavenly
identity, just like we all do,
that his celestial
self, his star self,
is truly a great, luminous
being, probably a rainbow
body being, who serves
before the face of God.
And this aspect of ourselves,
our Earthly self, again,
is just a-- sort of like
the puppet on the string
that's here to
explore earth life,
perhaps to work out karma,
to learn certain things,
or, in the deepest
Gnostic sense,
to serve as an
agent of God's love.
That's why we're here is to
learn to love to the greatest
extent that we possibly can.
To receive the knowledge
from the higher self
requires, obviously, that we
let go of fear and embrace love,
but also that we must
be trying to be reaching
beyond the evil, dark,
material, physical earth body
and towards that of the
good, light, immaterial,
and spiritual worlds.
So much of our time is
spent serving the material
world rather than
the immaterial.
I often ask people
when they're working
in the spiritual realms,
what is your exit strategy?
And by that I mean
where are you going
to go when you leave
the earth plane?
And how are you
going to get there?
What's your exit strategy?
I mean, we often
spend so much more
of our time focusing
on our 401(k)
than we focus on where we're
going from here in eternity.
Because Earth life is a
blink of eye, as they say,
and our eternal self
will be spending time
in eternity in the cosmos.
But yet on Earth, we
don't think too much
about that aspect of our
lives and that realm.
But the Gnostics
are encouraging us
to do so because, in doing so,
we broaden our perspective,
open up our spectrum.
We're focused on
that one channel,
listening to that same song over
and over again, when there's
a whole other range or spectrum
of frequency and vibration,
tones and tunes out here
that we can tap into just
by opening up our hearts and
minds to the immaterial realm.
The following Gnostic
story is offered
as a bit of a meditation, and
it would be OK at this point
if you just took a deep
breath, closed your eyes,
and for the next moment or so,
think deeply about the words
that I'm saying here.
Because what I'm
going to offer to
you is what's called
the Gnostic call.
In other words, this is when
the Gnostics would invite
new initiates into their
schools, their mystery schools,
this is the story
they would tell them.
And it serves as
sort of a guideline
or an outline of
our earthly mission.
So here it goes.
It's a Gnostic
story that's based
on the Gnostic
Hymn of the Pearl.
And it's also found in the
Nag Hammadi library in Egypt
and, as I said, is referred
to as the Gnostic call.
So here it goes.
Imagine you are a
prince or a princess.
One day, your parents,
the king and queen,
send you on a mission
to Egypt, which
symbolizes Earth
life in this case.
You must find a pearl
guarded by a hungry dragon.
You take off your royal robe,
your light garment that's
shimmering with jewels,
and you leave the kingdom
of your parents, which
is in a celestial realm.
You journey into Egypt,
putting on dirty clothing
and disguising yourself
as an Egyptian.
But somehow, the
Egyptians discover
that you're a foreigner.
They give you food that makes
you forget your royal birth.
You forget that you're a star
child temporarily inhabiting
this realm.
And this food makes you believe
that you're one of them.
And you sink into a
deep, forgetful sleep.
Your parents see
your plight, and they
send you a letter that
tells you to awaken.
As a matter of fact, the letter
is written in your heart,
according to the
Hymn of the Pearl.
It reminds you of your quest
to recover the pearl, which
is the Philosopher's Stone,
the Chintamani stone.
And then suddenly,
you remember who
you are, a child of
kings, a royal child
from the celestial realms.
And you quickly, then,
subdue the dragon
and recover the
pearl and depart,
leaving behind your dirty
clothing, your Earthly
clothing.
And what happens
next is you then
return to your native
land, the celestial realms,
and you see your shimmering,
royal robe, your light body
garment, which reminds
you of the splendor
you lived in before,
your original home.
The garment speaks
to you, telling you
that it belongs
to the one who is
stronger than all human beings.
And now you put on your
royal robe once more,
and you return to
your father's palace.
The king and queen, of
course, symbolize the creator
and a feminine
being the Gnostics
called the holy mother,
or Sophia, or wisdom.
Their kingdom is a realm of
light, a place totally outside
of matter as we know it.
It's spoken of as the
pleroma, or fullness.
Some believe it's the center
of the Milky Way galaxy.
Your royal robe,
the shimmering robe,
that represents your true self,
your divine lineage and image.
The dirty clothing represents
your Earthly body, your Earthly
matter body, which
you donned when
you entered Egypt,
the material world.
So this expresses
for us this idea
that we're originally celestial
light beings who temporarily
inhabit one of these
earthly vehicles.
And our ultimate mission
is to recall who we truly
are as celestial beings and
reclaim that garment of light.
When you descended into the
Earth plane into mortality,
you left behind
your divine image.
You forgot who you
truly were, and you
became an incomplete person.
You fell asleep when you
forgot your true origin.
And the message sent by your
parents represents the savior.
He will awaken you,
this messenger,
and will remind
you what you must
do: recover the pearl, that
divine spark within your soul,
find your way back to
the realm of the light,
and clothe yourself once more
in your royal light garment.
In other words, reintegrate
with your divine image.
This is the message of the
Gnostics, the Gnostic call.
And by recovering your soul and
reintegrating with the divine,
remembering yourself as in
the Egyptian story of Osiris,
you will have achieved
gnosis, or knowledge, awakened
conscience-- consciousness,
enlightenment,
which is salvation
in the gnostic sense.
It's something you
must do for yourself,
and only you can
do for yourself.
For the Gnostics,
achieving gnosis
meant to know oneself as God.
Know thyself is
the key inscription
over the temple of Delphi.
That's the primary
Gnostic inscription.
Know thyself as a divine being.
But to know meant not merely to
understand one's divine origin,
but to achieve the classic goal
of the mystic union with God.
That is our ultimate goal.
And putting on the royal
garment and recovering the pearl
are just some of
the images Gnostics
used to describe
achieving gnosis.
According to one gnostic
myth, the shaping
of the material
world was the result
of Sophia, who is
often described
as an emanation
of eternal light,
light beyond light, coming
from beyond the material world,
an immaculate mirror
of God's activity,
and as the spouse of the
Lord, say the Gnostic texts.
She's visualized as a goddess.
Here's an icon of
Sophia from Russia
in the late 16th
century, where we
see Sophia enthroned
with Mary and John
the Baptist and the baby
Jesus on either side.
We see the familiar imagery
of the portal, or the gateway.
It could actually be an image
of the divine pearl as well.
In another example, we see
Sophia enthroned once again,
and it illustrates the
concept of personifying Wisdom
as a deity, as a
feminine deity, that
was familiar to the Romans.
They got this from the Greeks
and the Greek philosophy
and the mystery religions of
the Near East of Egypt, of Iran
and Iraq, where these
concepts were proliferated
and were ultimately synthesized
by the Jewish mystics,
known as the Essenes, who
lived in Alexandria, Egypt,
in Jerusalem, and ultimately
moved to Qumran in the Holy
Land.
For Christian theologians,
its legitimacy
was endorsed in
the opening verses
of the ninth chapter of
the book of Proverbs.
"Wisdom hath built
her house," they said.
And of course,
Wisdom's house can
be interpreted on many levels.
At one level, Wisdom's
house is our body,
and Sophia dwells within us.
Her throne is our body.
Now think about that.
Your body is actually the
throne of this divine light
and this divine energy.
So here we see
Sophia, once again,
clothed in red, winged,
with Mary holding the baby
Jesus and John the
Baptist on either side.
Mary and Jesus are
shown in these images
because they were
the two-- or, excuse
me, Mary and John the Baptist
are shown because they were
the two most important people
in the mission of Jesus,
the messenger sent here to
awaken us and to enlighten us.
Here's a beautiful painting
by Sano di Piedro showing
Wisdom emanating from God.
And we look at this image
here, and we readily
think, OK, I see the stars.
We see God in another realm.
And Wisdom being pushed
into the material realm
as if through a
portal, a gateway,
a wormhole-- very
interesting idea.
Because what links
dimensions but a wormhole?
Here we see, again,
Wisdom clothed
in royal garments with
the crown and scepter
as she sits on a throne
as the personification
of the Wisdom of God.
This is a particular favorite,
because we see, again, Wisdom
is winged, radiant,
wearing the red robe.
And I emphasize the
red robe because we're
going to see that come
back up, that imagery come
back up in a really powerful
place here in a moment.
Continuing, now we see
another example here
with Wisdom with
Jesus just behind,
indicating that he is also
from this otherworldly,
celestial realm, or
other dimensional realm.
Another example, also
from Russia, same imagery.
So we see it over
and over again.
But I particularly like this
one because we see, of course,
Wisdom with the red
robe, winged, Mary,
John the Baptist on either side.
But look at the
detail above Jesus.
Now this is always
fascinating to me
in Christian art when
I see above Sophia,
or any other figure, angels
holding this banner of stars.
The reason that's
so intriguing to me
is because what it symbolizes
is an other dimensional realm.
This is with these artists are
expressing the idea of a realm
beyond the stars, a light
beyond light, something that
is almost unfathomable
to the human imagination,
and is shown very simply
and elegantly here
as this banner of stars that
is unrolled by the angels.
Because of course,
these angelic beings
possess the power
of the universe.
They can roll up a
dimension into a roll
and unroll it and step through
that gateway and travel
interdimensionally.
And by the way, this is
something that all of us
are said to have the capability
of doing or attaining
these capabilities.
So think about that.
So, side by side
example here of a couple
of these images of
Wisdom enthroned
and in the one on the
right in particular
with the banner of stars
above, representing
the other dimensions.
One of our favorite
paintings, of course,
is Constantino Brumidi,
who painted Wisdom holding
her staff of arcanum in
the United States capital,
the US Capitol temple.
So of course Wisdom
is going to be there.
She's present.
She's guiding the
founding fathers
and is an inspiration to
the founding fathers, who
must have understood
this idea of the divine
spark when they expressed
their idea of creating
a psychological space, America,
where souls could attain
ultimate wisdom and their
ultimate capability.
Through her desire
to know the Father,
Wisdom, Sophia, was
cast out of the Pleroma,
the Gnostic heaven,
again possibly
the center of the galaxy, at
least in some people's views.
And I like that, because it
localizes in our imagination
the location of God's throne.
And her desire gave birth to
God, who created the material
world, again showing this
overlap between the immaterial
and the material world.
Although she was eventually
restored to the Pleroma,
bits of her divinity remain
in the material world.
These are the divine sparks.
So here we see Sophia from
a 16th century painting
from the "Book of
Wonders," shown
as a feminine angel
holding the trumpet.
Now look at that trumpet
and the detail here.
And just see if you can pull
out the wormhole symbolism,
as I can.
We have this bell-shaped
opening here.
We have this tube and the
opening coming out here.
Maybe, maybe not, is what
the artist had in mind here.
But from a modern
perspective, we
can look at that image and
say, that's a wormhole.
And again, "Wisdom
has built their house.
She has set up her seven
pillars," the famed seven
pillars of wisdom.
And when we're looking at
various interpretations
of that statement,
as in this example
here from Kiev of "Saint
Sophia The Wisdom of God,"
we see Sophia standing
amongst the seven pillars.
And of course, as
we look at this,
we see the seven pillars
are externalized.
We have Sophia, the baby
Christ in her heart chakra,
radiant, exploding into light,
a radiating light with the seven
pillars all around her.
And now, once again, when we
look at an image such as this
and we see Sophia with her open
heart chakra and her hands out,
it's a good thing to do to
mirror that image, to reflect
what you're seeing as well as
contemplating and meditating
on this image.
So if you put up your
hands to your screen,
you can reflect
the energy that's
emanating from Sophia
at this moment.
That is the intention
behind images
such as this, is that we're to
use them as mirrors in order
to bring this divine light
and wisdom into our own life.
And in a sense, then,
Sophia becomes the messenger
who has stepped through
the portal of your screen
and is now here to illuminate
and awaken your consciousness.
So take a moment here to
absorb this light and vibration
of wisdom coming from Sophia.
And as you're doing
so, once again
note that she is robed
in her red cloak.
Here's God above,
sending or beaming
this ray of divine light
and love into Sophia
from another worldly realm.
We see the radiant dove
of the Holy Spirit,
symbolizing the
cosmic vibration.
And finally, the whole
scene comes together.
We count the steps here.
We go one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, again,
all good children go to heaven.
And it looks as if Sophia is in
some otherworldly temple here.
And we feel as if we
can ascend the steps
and just enter into this divine
realm and stand beside her.
But another perspective here
is that those seven pillars
are actually within us.
They represent our chakras.
right?
The ladder, or stairway,
to heaven within us,
the seven pillars of wisdom.
And by activating the chakras,
we illuminate our consciousness
and become fully
functioning beings.
Another example, an icon
of Sophia, the holy Wisdom,
surrounded by the seven pillars.
It was particularly
in Russia coming out
of the Eastern
tradition where we
see images such as this that
are extraordinarily empowering.
And we're always stepping up
our vibration or our frequency.
We see the Hebrew
high priest here,
the Israelite high
priest, wearing the breast
plate of righteousness,
triggering us
that this is a path
of righteousness.
And righteous simply
means to follow
the good path, or
the godly path.
We all know those
self-righteous types.
That's not our goal.
But our goal certainly is
to become righteous beings,
to be on the path of doing the
right thing with right life,
right thought, right
action, right intention.
That's part of the
Buddhist Eightfold
Path of righteousness
that we're describing here
and suggests an overlap
between these Gnostic,
or enlightened, traditions.
Our behavior, our actions,
are the key in Earth life.
I mean, how do you behave
when no one is looking
is not a rhetorical question.
Because someone
always is looking.
Your divine self,
your higher self,
is always watching
and saying, William, I
know you could have done a
lot better in that situation.
And most often we
don't get to redo.
So it's always best to have
our highest intention in mind
and make sure our actions
are on the right path.
Most of us, unfortunately,
in the Earth plane--
this isn't a judgment
or an incrimination.
But most of us
remain unconscious
of the original spark
within us and certainly
the messenger within us.
We tend to externalize,
and we feel
like there's a savior being
or some other figure that's
going to come into our life
and make everything OK.
And we don't take that
responsibility for ourselves
when the Gnostics were clearly
telling us, hey, it's up to us.
It's up to you to take
that first right step
and stay on that right path.
So what we have to do is
become conscious of this aspect
of ourselves during an
awakening experience.
Sometimes that's a
moment of synchronicity.
We've probably all had
that experience, where
we're driving down the
road and all of a sudden,
a voice says, oh, no.
You're about to turn right,
but you've got to turn left.
And we follow that guidance.
And then we look to
the right, and there's
a cataclysmic event that occurs.
And we wonder, gosh, where
did that voice come from?
Well, that's our
higher self that's
always sitting right
beside us all along.
It has that bird's eye view.
It can see on down the road.
It can see the future.
And if we listen to that
voice and consistently listen
to that voice, we're going
to avoid many obstacles.
But not only that, it's
where it's leading us
is to that place of the light
and illumination and awakening.
That's its ultimate intention.
And that's where we
want to go is that place
of light and illumination.
Every person has within
them a higher ego,
or portion of the cosmic soul.
The Sufis and the Kabbalists
called it the divine spark.
And they believe it's
contained or imprisoned
within the human body.
My good friend, an artist
Mr. Dana Augustine,
visualized the divine
spark for us in this way,
showing a humanoid
shape, a human female,
in an almond-shaped gateway,
a mandorla, surrounded
by rainbow-colored
light, or fire,
with this golden
kernel surrounding it.
We can see this based
on Gnostic texts.
And this is how they
described the divine spark
as that golden kernel.
In fact, the Gnostics
teach that who we are
and what it is that is
enlightened within us--
or perfected is the term
they also prefer to use,
in the alchemical tradition,
that is-- is a solar drop,
an immortal pearl, an
indestructible drop, a seed
atom that is perceived by
some as a drop of molten gold
or stardust.
Remember that Joni Mitchell
song, "you are stardust,
you are golden?"
That's an absolute,
literal Gnostic truth
that she's offering, a true gem
she's offering in that song.
It is the inner light within us.
So perhaps you want
to take a moment
to meditate on
this image as well.
And take it into your being
and reflect on, wait a minute,
this body is not who I truly am.
This divine spark, this immortal
pearl, this spec of stardust
is who I truly am.
And that is what will
carry me from incarnation
to incarnation on my
path of reincarnation.
Various names for this
transcendent aspect of our self
are offered.
That's called Our
Original Luminous Nature
in Chinese Manichaeanism, the
Living Self, the Luminous Self.
Mana.
It's also referred to
as the Spirit in Us,
the Inner Man, the
Spark, the Divine Spark,
the Seed of Light, all
perfectly appropriate terms
for describing this
true essence within us.
The Bible alludes to the idea
of a divine spark within us.
Genesis 1:26 teaches
that every human being
possesses the image of God.
Ecclesiastes declares
that God has set eternity
in the hearts of men.
That might even suggest
a location of the divine
spark within us.
Do we have that aspect of
ourselves in our hearts,
or is it located in
another part of our body?
In Luke, Jesus proclaims the
kingdom of God is within you.
It's spread out all around
us, and we just don't see it.
We're blinded by
the material light.
We think this is
all there is, and we
stay focused on this very
narrow frequency spectrum,
very seldom wandering
out beyond it.
But that's where the
divine self lives
is on the periphery,
on the perimeter,
beyond the narrow way.
That's what we're
called upon to do
is to expand our consciousness,
to expand our imagination,
to encompass the
immaterial realm
and realize that all, everything
that we see that's material
actually originates in
the immaterial realm.
The Bible teaches that
every human being possesses
an immaterial soul
spirit, a divine spark.
And it is this part
of us that connects
with God-- very
powerful teaching.
It's no exaggeration
to say, actually,
that the discovery of this
transcendent, inner aspect
of our self, or this
principle within us,
and the supreme concern
about its destiny
is the very center
of gnostic belief.
In fact, it's the aim
of all of our lives
is to make that connection.
Remember the Hymn of the Pearl.
It says, remember who you are.
Remember that immortal
pearl within you.
Snatch it away from the
dragon that guards it.
And the dragon, of course,
is the material Earth life
that seeks to consume us.
The divine spark,
the Gnostics teach,
is what grows the
vehicles for incarnation,
in particular the human
body, but the Gnostics,
like the ancient Egyptians, seem
to believe that we could even
incarnate as cats and
other animals-- whatever
suits the needs of the soul,
whatever it needs to learn.
But let's just focus
on the human body now
and this teaching
that the divine spark
is what grows our physical body
as a vehicle for incarnation.
All the individual souls,
or divine particles
of primordial light, constitute
the great universal soul.
We all have one.
And it is what has created
our physical body, which
means our physical
body is always
connected to all that is.
We just have to take the
blinders off, take off
the lens of Earth life and
awaken to the greater cosmos.
Where is that divine
spark located in the body?
Well, in some
traditions, they want
to put it down here in the
sacral area of the body.
They put it in the
lower pelvis region.
In fact, this is a
Jewish Gnostic tradition,
where they tell us that
the divine spark is located
in the sacrum bone,
which they refer
to as the sacred or holy
bone, the resurrection bone.
Also they call it
luz, or almond.
And they refer to it as a
doorway to the other world.
And they tell us that
it is this bone that
ultimately resurrects the body.
Other traditions tell
us, no, the divine spark
is actually located
in the heart chakra.
Well, that makes sense.
But the truth of
the matter is here
is that-- or, the
fact of the matter
is that our body is manifested
by this divine aspect
of ourselves according
to the Gnostics.
Bones, fascia,
connective tissue,
and even some of the
supportive tissues in the brain
are composed of a liquid
crystalline substance.
It's like a crystal on a radio
set that's used by the divine
spark to tune in to
these spiritual or divine
frequencies.
The interesting thing about the
crystals and crystal structures
is that they actually allow
for quantum phenomena.
And ultimately it is through
this crystalline aspect
of ourselves that
we're able to tune
in to these divine
vibrations and reconnect
with our true, divine
self in the Pleroma.
So bottom line is, in
effect, our bodies and brains
are a device, a tool,
an instrument created
by our divine spark out of DNA
to act as information gathering
equipment, as well as Earthly
transportation vehicles and as
energy harvesting and
processing devices.
E.J. Gold has a beautiful book
called "The Human Biological
Transformational Apparatus."
And it sounds like kind
of a cold, left brain way
to think of the body, but
it drives the point home.
This body is meant to be used
as a vehicle for incarnation,
that our divine spark grows to
fulfill its spiritual mission
and destiny.
And what we are
charged with doing
is taking our emphasis
off the physical
and putting it on the
immaterial, divine aspect
within.
And so here we are,
once again, looking
at these images of
the divine spark.
This spark, as I
said, is thought
of as a kernel of immortality.
It's sort of an egg
or embryo and may
be compared with the
chrysalis from which
the butterfly emerges.
And as I've said in
other presentations,
the ultimate example
of the butterfly human
is, of course, the
resurrection of Christ.
And in Pinturicchio's beautiful
"Resurrection" image here,
we see Jesus manifesting
the light body,
looking very much like a
kind of a popcorn kernel that
has exploded into
a piece of popcorn,
or the divine spark that is
manifesting a radiating light.
It expresses the idea that
the human body is just
an aspect of our true selves.
It is meant to be utilized for
a specific purpose, acquisition
of spiritual knowledge and
understanding during life
and ultimately to transform
it, to resurrect it
into its most magnificent
light body aspect.
So here we see Jesus
manifesting the light body
from within the
physical human body.
Pinturicchio also shows
this resurrection image,
where now, instead
of Jesus, it's
actually Mary who is
in the divine spark,
the almond-shaped
shaped gateway.
And she is modeling this
process of resurrection for us.
She's going from human to divine
and radiating the divine light,
or allowing her divine
spark to fully manifest
as a light being.
Another powerful example-- The
"Assumption of the Virgin."
Most people don't-- when they
think about resurrection,
they're thinking about Jesus.
But little do they realized
that Mother Mary, as well
as the Magdalene, also went
through the resurrection
experience.
And here from Bernardo
Daddi's beautiful painting
in the Metropolitan
Museum, we see
Mary in the almond-shaped
gateway, symbolic of the divine
spark.
She's holding the
book, and she's
radiating the light of the light
body, or the resurrection body.
As usual, the crown on her head
is radiant and illuminated.
She wears the jewel
on her crown chakra,
indicating that she has
fully activated her chakras.
Same thing here, where
Mary is in the light body.
Her cloak is covered
with stars, indicating
that she is in her star
body, or her radiant body.
And she is showing us,
or modeling for us,
this process of awakening,
this process of allowing
the divine spark to
be fully illuminated.
She has become a fully
functioning human being.
The seed, of course, was the
earliest Christian metaphor
for the resurrection
of the body.
As a seed is transformed
into a body, so,
too, do our Earthly bodies--
or will our Earthly bodies
be transformed into our
Heavenly light bodies.
Now this is a very
powerful concept
here because it tells us that
the blueprint for this glory
body, light body, rainbow
body, body of light
is within our DNA.
It's already there.
We don't need to go seek it.
It's hard-wired into us.
It's coded into us.
And it's awaiting the moment
when a mysterious force, called
"the last trump" in the book
of Revelation, a tone, wave
of reverberation, is what
the Greek word trump means.
And then it is
awakened from its sleep
and it begins reaching
towards heaven.
Again, affirming this
idea that everything
is already built in within us.
And what we're
challenged with doing
is connecting with that
divine aspect of ourselves.
Just as an oak tree
does not look at all
like an acorn from
which it sprung,
but has physical continuity
with the acorn-- it other words,
it's the same DNA-- so, too,
does our light body grow
from our divine spark,
or our seed atom.
And the idea is that too often
we identify with the acorn
and don't feed our imagination
with images of the oak tree.
That's how I view, in part,
my mission and Clare's mission
in "Arcanum" is we hope
to feed your light body,
your imagination, with
images of the light body.
So now you can begin connecting
with that aspect of yourself.
And you can begin to grow
into that aspect of yourself.
And as you start growing into
it, you, like the oak tree,
will become an unstoppable
force, a force of inspiration
that will continue
to reverberate long
into the future.
Paul tells us that we will
be changed, metamorphosed,
or transfigured by an
incomparably great power,
the same one that
resurrected Jesus.
The body will be imperishable,
immortal, glorious, powerful
and spiritual.
Paul compares this change
to the sprouting of a seed.
So obviously, Paul must
have taken a lesson
from the Gnostics up at
Qumran or the Essenes
up at Qumran who were
familiar with this imagery.
Perhaps he learned it in
Egypt, where they also
were familiar with this idea
that we are a seed atom,
a divine spark within that
can grow into this radiant
aspect, fed with
the proper light
or vibration, this great
power, as it's described.
In Nashville, Tennessee,
where Clare and I live,
we go to a beautiful church.
And in a small chapel, they
have this magnificent image
of the Resurrection of Jesus.
He's exploding into
this radiant light.
He's the divine
spark that's fanned
into a flame and the flame into
a sun and the sun into a star,
to paraphrase Harold
Bailey once again.
But what intrigues
me about this is
that when we come
into the detail,
we see that Jesus is wearing
his red robe like Sophia.
But he's also wearing
a white garment as well
that is covered with acorns.
We get the message.
We are the acorn that is
growing into the magnificent oak
tree, capable of
reaching into the stars
and indeed becoming a
celestial or a star being.
But it's not just Christianity
or the Egyptian tradition
or the Near Eastern
traditions that
have this idea of the
resurrection of the body,
the glorification of the
body, the transformation
into the rainbow body of light.
It's also known to
the Maya as well.
And what we're looking at here
is a Maya resurrection plate,
dated to around 680 BC
by an unknown artist
in the Museum of
Fine Arts in Boston.
What we see here is what's
described as the Maya First
Father.
The Maya depicted on
their funerary ceramics
the miraculous moment when the
successful soul-- and I love
that term because the successful
soul is the resurrected soul.
And we find that its
purpose is to remind
the soul of the rebirth
it could win for itself.
So this is how
the Maya expressed
this idea of resurrection.
And they would, in life,
create these plates
that people could study,
contemplate, meditate,
reflect on.
And then these
plates were placed
in the tomb so in the
journey to the afterlife,
the soul would be reminded
of what it's doing.
It's resurrecting
itself from its shell.
And what we see here is the
transfigured and bejeweled
First Father squeezing
upward through a crack
in the cosmic turtle shell,
which symbolizes Earth.
This is the miraculous
moment of resurrection
being portrayed in
the Maya tradition.
So here we see the turtle
shell, symbolizing Earth life.
And then squeezing
out of it, we're
going to see the first father
with his feathered headdress,
emerging from the earth plane
from the material realm,
entering into immaterial realm.
The cosmic turtle shell, says
Maya scholar David Gillette,
is the supernatural
maize kernel.
That's the divine spark,
the kernel of immortality
that burst open to allow the
resurrection body to soar up
from the realm of death into
the world of eternal life.
So this is the Maya
concept of resurrection,
of the emergence of the
divine spark within.
The First Father has
feathers sprouting
from his headdress
that symbolize
the leaves of the world
tree he is becoming.
Remember the acorn turning into
the oak, the world tree going
onward and upward, branching
out into other realms
and into other worlds.
So, a magnificent representation
of the successful soul,
the resurrected soul.
This takes us over
to Botticelli,
who will be the subject
of Clare's Beyond the Veil
segment.
What is Venus doing but
coming out of her shell
in a moment of resurrection?
We'll leave that
for her to unveil
all the other resurrection
symbolism in Botticelli's
magnificent masterpiece here.
Jesus, of course, went through
this experience in his baptism,
where he emerges from the
water, home of the sea shell,
and is then given, through
this cosmic vibration,
his new cloak, or
garment, of light.
In Buddhism, this
divine spark, this seed,
is called the "Adamantine
Nucleus of Radiant or Clear
Light."
That's a mouthful.
The term "Adamantine
Body" should
remind us of Adam, because it
refers to our primordial body
and also the Garden of Eden.
It refers to the
subtle body, also known
as the "vajra body" or
the "diamond body"--
very important concept,
also, to remember
when Clare gets into her
Beyond the Veil segment.
Growing or revealing
this body, according
to Buddhist alchemists,
is the great work.
It is arcanum.
And it's about awakening
the Adamantine body
and attaining the divine
body or the vajra body,
the body of light, expressed
in this beautiful illustration
here from Buddhism.
In closing for this
segment, I want
to share with you an
amazing revelation.
And that is that the
Greek word "adamas"
means unbreakable
and unalterable.
Our soul truly is
unbreakable no matter
what happens to us
on the Earth plane.
We are like that diamond,
unbreakable and unalterable.
And the Adamantine Land
is the Gnostic term
for the Heavenly realm
out of which we emerge.
We are truly divine and
eternal beings, unbreakable,
unalterable.
And what that means is
that this should give us
confidence to reach out
and to try new things,
knowing that we can't possibly
fail, in the eternal sense,
because it's all about awakening
our soul's true potential.
In esoteric Tibetan Buddhism,
Adamantine or Admantine Reality
connotes an unimaginably hard
substance that is impenetrable,
unbreakable, and
unyielding, as well as
being directly
linked to diamonds.
This takes us to a really
interesting transfiguration
image.
I took this photo in the
chapel at Roslin Chapel
in Roslin, Scotland,
where we see
Jesus in this
transfiguration scene
with a diamond behind
him, indicating
that he has attained the diamond
body of the Buddhist tradition,
manifesting that light
body, that unalterable,
unbreakable light body.
Below the disciples is a Latin
inscription and a dedication
to James Francis Harry Sinclair,
the fifth Earl of Roslin.
The inscription
reads, "In Lumine tuo
bidebimus lumen," which has been
translated as "In your light
we shall see the divine light."
That's the Gnostic
call-- in your light.
In your light, we shall
see the divine light.
So let that diamond
within you glow.
Begin to radiate that
light with the confidence
that you are a divine
and unalterable,
unbreakable being
here on a mission
to spread divine light and love.
And in closing, I want to share
a meditation I learned about
from Jay Weidner in one
of his presentations,
where he quotes Dr.
Brian Weiss, who
says that during a
meditation or during a dream,
he saw a diamond in everybody's
chest, a beautiful diamond
with 1,000 facets.
Everybody's diamond
is the same, he said,
but some of the diamonds are
covered with dirt or tar.
And the job of the
soul seems to be
to clean the facets--
how beautiful.
When all of the
facets are clean,
the pressure seems to
dissolve, and the diamond
just radiates light, or
disperses into the universe.
Some people-- and
here's the key--
have polished a lot of
the facets, maybe 900
or 999, others only a few.
They have a lot of work
to do, says Dr. Weiss.
Then he understood.
Everybody's diamond is the same.
1,000 facets and the
potential is exactly the same,
and everybody is on
the same journey.
So let that light
shine within you.
Clean the facets
of your diamond,
and let that light
shine through.
And as you allow
your light to shine,
it allows my light to
shine greater, too.
That's "Arcanum."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And now, in this segment
of Beyond the Veil,
Clare is going to take us closer
to the mysteries of the divine
spark through the eyes of
the great Renaissance master
Sandro Botticelli.
>>CLARE: In this segment
of Beyond the Veil,
we are going to explore the
work of Sandro Botticelli,
one of the definitive painters
of the Italian Renaissance,
and a man who was not
only privy to arcanum,
but he also painted it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Born to a poor tanner in the
back streets of Florence,
Alessandro Filipepi
was brought up
by his brother, who
gave him the nickname
Botticelli, meaning
little barrel.
The name stuck, and
Botticelli's art
became the most intelligent,
creative, and recognizable
voices of the
Florentine Renaissance
that also saw the rise
of Donatello, Leonardo,
Michelangelo, and Raphael,
amongst other great masters.
This painting is part of
an altarpiece commissioned
for a convent for
repentant prostitutes.
In the center is a vision
of the Trinity, God
the father, a dove,
symbolizing the Holy Spirit,
and Christ on the cross.
Flanking this
surprising apparition
are John the Baptist,
patron Saint of Florence,
and Mary Magdalene,
patroness of the convent.
By the late 1460s, Botticelli
had made a name for himself
under the apprenticeship
of the great Filippo Lippi,
where he was spotted by agents
of the most powerful family
of the Renaissance, the
Medicis, who were also
among history's
greatest mystic seekers.
The Medicis were immensely
wealthy and powerful.
They were obsessed with arcanum.
They hoped to create
a new Golden Age.
Botticelli would help
them visualize it.
The Medicis considered
themselves modern-day Magi.
The Chapel of the Magi
occupies an important place
in the Medici palace.
The chapel is famous for
this series of wall paintings
by Benozzo Gozzoli,
with the angels
in adoration in the
rectangular apse
and the journey of the
Magi in the large hall.
On the north wall, in the
entourage of the Magi Caspar,
is an ideal portrait
of Lorenzo de'
Medici, the future magnifico.
The meaning of Medici in
Italian is medical doctor,
although some believe
it means magic.
In 1460, 14 books called
Corpus Hermeticum were covertly
bought by a monk who
miraculously escaped
the Byzantium siege in 1453
to the court of Cosimo de'
Medici, ruler of Florence.
The central texts of
the Corpus Hermeticum
were lost to the West
in classical times.
The Corpus Hermeticum
texts dwell
upon the oneness
and goodness of God,
urge purification of the soul,
and defend religious practices
such as the
veneration of images.
The image itself will
show you the way,
says the Corpus Hermeticum.
Written by unknown
authors in Egypt
sometime before the end
of the 3rd century CE,
the Corpus Hermeticum
were part of
a once-substantial
literature attributed
to the mythic figure
of Hermes Trismegistus,
a Hellenistic fusion
of the Greek god Hermes
and the Egyptian god Thoth.
Corpus Hermeticum was
translated by Marsilio Ficino.
In order to get
arcanum, we must get
to know this Renaissance Magi.
High priest, physician,
musician, magician, astrologer,
and Christian, he was the
original Renaissance man.
He is featured in Ghirlandaio's
"An Angel Visits Zechariah."
He also appears in a scene
showing Plato and Ficnino
with Hermes in Sienna Cathedral.
Ficino and his successors
regarded Hermes Trismegistus
as a contemporary of Moses.
And his teachings were seen as a
perennial philosophy, predating
yet anticipating
Christianity with its roots
in ancient Egypt.
For him, Jesus was the exemplar
of ultimate human potential.
He sought to fuse
Christianity with its roots.
Bellini's "Blood
of the Redeemer"
shows Jesus in the foreground.
In the background, the
caduceus wand of arcanum
is passed off,
suggesting the torch had
been passed to Christianity.
Ficino realized
that Christianity
was a variation,
an interpretation
of a group of followers
of the Corpus Hermeticum,
specifically the
cult of Serapis.
Ficino also revived Platonism,
the philosophy of Plato.
The human soul originated
in the higher world
but is trapped in the
body, in the lower world.
And Plato's writing
sometimes described
the return, or
ascent, of the soul
to its true, perfect home, the
unity of the one that is God.
Ficino wrote and performed music
that drew down or attracted
stellar influences, the
music of the spheres.
This was possible
because the human soul
is made of star
stuff, he taught.
Ficino wrote extensively
about techniques
whereby planetary powers
were to be invoked
by the principles
of Hermetic analogy.
As above, so below.
As within, so without.
This is the Hermetic
law of Ficino.
Ficino believed he could draw
down the power of the stars
and planets to aid in
his spiritual evolution.
We are trapped on
Earth, he believed.
The only way out was to
refine the soul and descend
to the Heavenly realms.
Ficino wrote extensively
about techniques
whereby planetary powers
were to be invoked
by principles of
Hermetic analogy.
Chiefly accused of
being his follower,
and the man who
incorporated this knowledge
in his paintings, was
Sandro Botticelli.
Botticelli would help
the Medicis visualize
the new Golden Age,
and in so doing,
is credited with creating
a whole new genre of art.
Embedded symbolism
and private jokes
characterize this new
genre; so did the intention
to draw down planetary
powers into his art.
Renaissance art, including
Raphael, but particularly
that of Botticelli,
can only be understood
with this magical knowledge,
or arcanum, in mind.
Known also as "The
Madonna of the Book,"
this painting represents
the Virgin and child
in a domestic setting.
Intent on reading a volume,
perhaps the Book of Love,
Jesus holds a golden crown
and three shafts of light.
These could represent the
triple shafts of enlightenment.
"The Magnificat" fused
Botticelli's Christian beliefs
with Renaissance
naturalistic style.
The Virgin Mary wears
her cloak of many colors.
Two angels place a
plasma-like crown on her head.
The title of the painting
derives from the word
"magnificat," which is written
in the book held by the two
angels.
Mary is completing the last
words of the prayer as her son
guides her hand.
Botticelli befriended the heirs
to the Medici empire, Lorenzo
and his brother Guiliano.
Lorenzo's court, and
indeed all of Florence,
was crowded with secret
groups and shadowy societies.
Florentine coppersmith
Bartelomeo Masi
recorded in his
diary in April 1492
that as Lorenzo de'
Medici lay dying,
a violent storm damaged
the duomo's bell
tower and buildings in the
Palazzo Medici neighborhood.
The storm was caused by
the release of a demon
that Lorenzo had kept imprisoned
in a ring for many years.
An unusually bright star loomed
over the villa at Careggi,
fell, and disappeared at the
moment of Lorenzo's death.
Lorenzo has been called
"an heir to King Solomon"
for his ability to
magically bind demons
and draw planetary influences
into engraved stones.
It is claimed that he
sought these powers
to assure his souls' ascension.
Botticelli's "La Primavera"
was neither portrait, icon,
nor holy celebration.
It was pure fantasy,
inspired by poetry
and felled by a
vivid imagination.
This much-analyzed
painting shows
Venus, ancient goddess
of beauty and fertility,
celebrating the arrival
of spring, la primavera.
She is surrounded by
allegorical figures representing
the virtues and gods
of the ancient world.
"The Birth of Venus" was unlike
any other painting of its time.
Botticelli presents us with
a beautiful world to enter.
Featuring the
goddess of love, it
was designed to be hung
above the marital bed.
It was a daring celebration
of human desire.
Previous to this, it was
unheard of to see a woman,
save for Eve, in the nude.
The painting was
so controversial it
was kept behind closed
doors for half a century.
It is considered one of
the most iconic pieces
in the history of Western art.
Metallic gold is
everywhere in the painting.
It's in zephyr's wings
and in the tree leaves.
The entwined zephyr push
the winds to the goddess.
Our eye is drawn to Venus
coming out of her shell.
According to many
analysts, Botticelli
is depicting the spiritual
beauty of the soul.
Botticelli paints
Venus being born
from the philosophical sea.
This represents
the divine spark.
It has the same meaning
as the Mayan resurrection
scene of the First Father
emerging from the turtle shell
or Earth life.
Like Botticelli's
other masterpiece,
"Pallas and the Centaur,"
"The Birth of Venus"
is painted on canvas,
fairly unusual for its time,
using a technique
of thin tempura,
based on the use of diluted
egg yolk, which lends itself
particularly well to give
the painting that aspect
of extraordinary transparency.
Why is Venus being
mantled with red?
An answer is found in alchemy,
where a white phase, called
Venus, precedes
going to redness.
Here we recall that
Wisdom's mantle is red.
Is Venus being
cloaked in wisdom?
In 1482, the Medici
family commissioned
Sandro Botticelli's painting
of "Pallas and the Centaur."
This is Athena in all her glory.
The painting, cited as
"Camilla and a Satyr"
is recorded in the interior
of the so-called Old
House of the family in a
room on the ground floor,
alongside the chamber of
Lorenzo de Pierre Francisco,
together with the "Primavera,"
also by Botticelli.
It was hung high above the door
leading to the antechamber.
Athena is wearing a light
gown, white and transparent,
decorated with
diamond-tipped tipped rings.
She is wrapped in a
large green cloak.
A mesh of olive shoots encircles
her shoulders, arms, breast,
and thighs, forming a sort of
vegetable breast plate, which
makes her gown
cling to the body.
Botticelli decorated
the goddess' delicious
dress with a diamond ring
and the three-ring symbol
of the Medici, which is also
the symbol of the Cintamani,
or wish-fulfilling jewel.
The points where
the branches cross
are fixed with diamond-tipped
rings, while on her nipples
are two mounted diamonds.
This indicates she is in
her light, or diamond, body.
Her long, thick,
blonde tresses are
adorned with a wreath of
entwined olive branches
with a diamond at the top
within a four-leaf setting.
>>WILLIAM: Clare, that
was incredible-- Sandro
Botticelli and the diamond body.
I'm William Henry.
Thank you for
watching "Arcanum."
>>CLARE: And I'm Clare Henry.
See you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]